Packing with FA2 (#2307)
huggingface/blog: packing-with-FA2.md

---
title: "Improving Hugging Face Training Efficiency Through Packing with Flash Attention" 

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/packing-with-FA2/thumbnail.gif

Author: good catch. done

authors:

> - user: RhuiDih

Author: @pcuenca is the current syntax for defining the users correct or incorrect?

> - user: RhuiDih

Reviewer: The syntax looks fine, but the users don't exist. For example, instead of `RhuiDih` it should be `RQlee`: https://huggingface.co/RQlee

> - user: RhuiDih

Author: aha ! thx !

  guest: true
  org: ibm
- user: ArthurZucker
- user: achikundu
  guest: true
  org: ibm
- user: wynterl
  guest: true
  org: ibm
- user: raghukiran1224
  guest: true
  org: ibm
- user: mayank31398
  guest: true
  org: ibm
---

## TL;DR

> Packing instruction tuning examples whilst still availing Flash Attention is now available in Hugging Face, thanks to a [recent PR](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/31629) and the new [DataCollatorWithFlattening](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/data_collator#transformers.DataCollatorWithFlattening)

Author: correct, done

> Users will find it can provide up to 2x improvement in training throughput while maintaining convergence quality.

Author: done

## Introduction

> It is well known that packing small examples together improves the computational efficiency of training. However, previous implementations of Flash Attention 2 did not consider example boundaries during packing, leading to potential issues in instruction tuning. In instruction tuning, it is important for the masking mechanism to be aware of the example boundaries if the examples are packed together to avoid undesirable cross-example-attention. 

Author: sure !

Hugging Face Transformers now address this with a new feature that maintains boundary awareness during packing, alongside the introduction of a new data collator, `DataCollatorWithFlattening`.

> By selecting `DataCollatorWithFlattening`, Hugging Face `Trainer` users can now seamlessly concatenate sequences into a single tensor while accounting for sequence boundaries during Flash Attention computations. This is achieved through the `flash_attn_varlen_func`, which calculates each mini-batch's cumulative sequence lengths (`cu_seqlens`).

Author: done

## Up to 2x throughput increase 

We see significant improvement in training throughput using this feature with the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`. The figure below shows the throughput measured in tokens/second during training. In this example, the throughput is the per-GPU average over 8 A100-80 GPU over one epoch of a 20K randomly selected sample from two different instruct tuning datasets, FLAN and OrcaMath. 

![throughput](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/09248359-5aa2-4b36-b896-ba76f98ecbfa)

![throughput](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/packing-with-FA2/thruput.png)

> FLAN has short sequences on average but a large variance in sequence length, so that example lengths in each batch may vary widely. This means that padded FLAN batches may require a considerable amount of padding. Training on the FLAN dataset shows a significant benefit from packing with position IDs in terms of increased throughput. We see a 2x throughput increase on the models shown here: llama2-7B, mistral-7B, and granite-8B-code. 

Author: good point, changed the emphasis to the new data collator instead of the pos IDs

OrcaMath has longer examples and a lower variance in example length. As such, the improvement from packing is lower. Our experiments show a 1.4x increase in throughput when training using this form of packing on the OrcaMath dataset across these three models.

![memory](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/377caa9c-cef5-4472-9128-85eb158faebf)

![memory](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/packing-with-FA2/memory.png)

Memory usage also improves through packing with `position_ids`. The following figure shows the peak memory usage of the same three models training on the same two datasets. Peak memory is reduced by 20% on the FLAN dataset, which benefits considerably from packing. 

Peak memory reduction is 6% on the OrcaMath dataset with its more homogeneous example lengths.

![ValLoss](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3fc30fd6-85a8-4f76-a644-7a0a7f16487d)

![ValLoss](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/packing-with-FA2/ValLoss.png)

> Packing examples, when it reduces the number of optimization steps, may harm training convergence. The new feature, however, retains the minibatches and, hence, the same number of optimization steps as would be used with padded examples. Thus, there is no impact on train convergence, as we see in the next figure, which shows identical validation loss of the same three models training on the same two datasets, whether the models are trained with padding or packing with `position_ids`.

Author: the figure was above not below. fixed now.

> ## How it works 

Author: removed mentioned to the pos IDs in the results section since I think discussing optim steps in the intro might confuse readers

input_ids = [[10,11,12,13,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,30,31,32,33,34,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401]]

labels = [[-100,11,12,13,-100,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,-100,31,32,33,34,-100,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401]] and

position_ids = [[0,1,2,3,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,0,1,2,3,4,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]]

The modifications required are lightweight and are limited to providing the `position_ids` to Flash Attention. 

This relies, however, on the model exposing `position_ids`. As of the time of writing, 14 models expose them and are supported by the solution. Specifically, Llama 2 and 3, Mistral, Mixtral, Granite, DBRX, Falcon, Gemma, OLMo, Phi 1, 2, and 3, phi3, Qwen 2 and 2 MoE, StableLM, and StarCoder 2 are all supported by the solution.

## Getting started
Reaping the benefits of packing with `position_ids` is easy. To use packing with `position_ids`, only two steps are required:

1) Instantiate the model with Flash Attention 2
2) Use the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`
   
## How to use it

![image1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/43790e8c-c2ca-4bc3-98ce-f06169624b2d)
![image2](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a77f17d-9289-4850-b293-543aa67f7d2e)

> 

Author: @pcuenca what is the suggested change ?

> 

Reviewer: This was about using the images from the dataset in the next two lines.

![image1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/packing-with-FA2/image1.png)
![image2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/packing-with-FA2/image2.png)

## Conclusions

> Packing instruction tuning examples with correct within-example-attention, while still availing of Flash Attention 2, is now available in Hugging Face, thanks to a recent PR Enhancing SFT Training Efficiency Using Packing and FlashAttention2 with Position ID and the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`. Benefits can be seen in throughput during training and peak memory usage. There is no degradation in training convergence, making it a win-win. Actual throughput and memory improvement depends on the model and the distribution of example lengths in the training data. Training with data that has a wide variation of example lengths will see the greatest benefit, with respect to padding, from using packing with `position_ids`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packing instruction tuning examples, instead of padding, is now fully compatible with Flash Attention 2, thanks to a recent PR and the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`. The method is compatible with models that use position IDs, and benefits can be seen in throughput during training and peak memory usage, with no degradation in training convergence. Actual throughput and memory improvement depends on the model and the distribution of example lengths in the training data. Training with data that has a wide variation of example lengths will see the greatest benefit, with respect to padding, from using packing with `position_ids`.
```

Author: done

> For a more detailed analysis, have a look at the paper at https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09105

Author: sure!

> # Improving Hugging Face Training Efficiency Through Packing with Flash Attention

Author: done

> # Improving Hugging Face Training Efficiency Through Packing with Flash Attention

Author: done

> # Improving Hugging Face Training Efficiency Through Packing with Flash Attention

Author: done

## TL;DR

> Packing instruction tuning examples whilst still availing Flash Attention is now available in Hugging Face, thanks to a recent PR (https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/31629/commits/8120b3a3c4077ed699b029cbc37256bf3c58b6e9#top)  and the new DataCollatorWithFlattening (https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/data_collator#transformers.DataCollatorWithFlattening). 

Author: done

Users will find it can provide up to 2x improvement in training throughput while maintaining convergence quality.

## Introduction

> It is well known that packing small examples together improves the computational efficiency of training. Previously, however, packing used with Flash Attention 2 did not take into account example boundaries. In instruction tuning, it is important for the masking mechanism to be aware of the example boundaries if the examples are packed together to avoid undesirable cross-example-attention. This feature is now available in Hugging Face Transformers, along with a new data_collator called DataCollatorWithFlattening.

Author: done

> By selecting DataCollatorWithFlattening, Hugging Face trainer users can now seamlessly concatenate sequences into a single tensor while accounting for sequence boundaries during Flash Attention computation. This is accomplished by using the ‘flash_attn_varlen_func’ by computing the cumulative sequence length ‘cu_seq-Lens’  of each mini-batch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By selecting `DataCollatorWithFlattening`, Hugging Face `Trainer` users can now seamlessly concatenate sequences into a single tensor while accounting for sequence boundaries during Flash Attention computations. This is achieved through the `flash_attn_varlen_func`, which calculates each mini-batch's cumulative sequence lengths (`cu_seqlens`).
```

Author: done

## Up to 2x throughput increase 

> We see significant improvement in training throughput using this feature with the new DataCollatorWithFlattening. The figure below shows the throughput, as measured in tokens/second during training. In this example, the throughput is the per-GPU average over 8 A100-80 GPU, over one epoch of a 20K randomly-selected sample from two different instruct tuning datasets, FLAN and OrcaMath. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We see significant improvement in training throughput using this feature with the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`. The figure below shows the throughput measured in tokens/second during training. In this example, the throughput is the per-GPU average over 8 A100-80 GPU over one epoch of a 20K randomly selected sample from two different instruct tuning datasets, FLAN and OrcaMath. 
```

Author: done

> ![thruput](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/09248359-5aa2-4b36-b896-ba76f98ecbfa)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![throughput](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/09248359-5aa2-4b36-b896-ba76f98ecbfa)
```

Author: done

> ![thruput](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/09248359-5aa2-4b36-b896-ba76f98ecbfa)

Reviewer 2: Please add images to https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/tree/main/blog

Author: currently both sets of images are there--will remove the local GitHub versions once the datasets versions are merged and those images are visible

> FLAN has short sequences on average but a large variance in sequence length, so that example lengths in each batch may vary widely. This means that padded FLAN batches may require a considerable amount of padding. Training on the FLAN data set hence shows significant benefit from packing with position IDs in terms of increased throughput. We see a 2x throughput increase on the models shown here: llama2-7B, mistral-7B and granite-8B-code. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FLAN has short sequences on average but a large variance in sequence length, so that example lengths in each batch may vary widely. This means that padded FLAN batches may require a considerable amount of padding. Training on the FLAN dataset shows a significant benefit from packing with position IDs in terms of increased throughput. We see a 2x throughput increase on the models shown here: llama2-7B, mistral-7B, and granite-8B-code. 
```

Author: done

> OrcaMath, has somewhat longer examples and a much lower variance in example length. As such, the improvement from packing is also somewhat lower. Our experiments show about a 1.4x increase in throughput using this form of packing training on OrcaMath across these three models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OrcaMath has somewhat longer examples and a much lower variance in example length. As such, the improvement from packing is also somewhat lower. Our experiments show a 1.4x increase in throughput using this form of packing training on OrcaMath across these three models.
```

> ![memory](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/377caa9c-cef5-4472-9128-85eb158faebf)

Reviewer 2: Same

> Memory usage also improves through the use of packing with position_ids. The next figure shows the peak memory usage of the same three models training on the same two datasets. Again, on the FLAN dataset which benefits considerably from packing, peak memory is reduced by around 20%. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Memory usage also improves through packing with position_ids. The following figure shows the peak memory usage of the same three models training on the same two datasets. Again, peak memory is reduced by around 20% on the FLAN dataset, which benefits considerably from packing. 
```

Author: done

That number is a more modest 6% on the OrcaMath dataset with its more homogeneous example lengths.

![ValLoss](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3fc30fd6-85a8-4f76-a644-7a0a7f16487d)

> Packing examples, when it reduces the number of optimisation steps, may have a detrimental impact on training convergence. The new feature, however, retains the minibatches and hence the same number of optimisation steps as would be used with padded examples. Thus, there is no impact on train convergence, as we see in the next figure that shows identical validation loss of the same three models training on the same two datasets, whether the models are trained with padding or packing with position_ids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Packing examples, when it reduces the number of optimization steps, may harm training convergence. The new feature, however, retains the minibatches and, hence, the same number of optimization steps as would be used with padded examples. Thus, there is no impact on train convergence, as we see in the next figure, which shows identical validation loss of the same three models training on the same two datasets, whether the models are trained with padding or packing with `position_ids`.
```

Author: done

> ## Here’s how it works 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How it works 
```

Author: done

Consider a batch of data with a batchsize = 4 where the four sequences are as follows:
[10,11,12,13] ; [20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27] ; [30,31,32,33,34] and [40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401].

> The padding-free collator returns the input IDs, labels, and the position_ids of each example after concatenating the examples together. Hence, the collator provides, for this example, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After concatenating the examples, the padding-free collator returns the input IDs, labels, and the `position_ids` of each example. Hence, the collator provides, for this example, 
```

Author: done

> input_ids: [[10,11,12,13,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,30,31,32,33,34,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401]]
> 
> labels: [[-100,11,12,13,-100,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,-100,31,32,33,34,-100,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401]] and
> 
> position_ids:[[0,1,2,3,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,0,1,2,3,4,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]]
> 

Reviewer 2: This might be more readable
```suggestion
input_ids = [[10,11,12,13,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,30,31,32,33,34,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401]]
labels = [[-100,11,12,13,-100,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,-100,31,32,33,34,-100,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,401]] and
position_ids = [[0,1,2,3,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,0,1,2,3,4,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]]
```

Author: done

> The modifications required are lightweight and are limited to providing the position_ids to Flash Attention. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The modifications required are lightweight and are limited to providing the `position_ids` to Flash Attention. 
```

Author: done

> This relies, however, on the model exposing position_ids. As of the time of writing, 14 models expose position IDs and are supported by the solution. Specifically: llama2/llama3, mistral, mixtral, granite, dbrx, falcon, gemma, olmo, phi/phi2, phi3, qwen2, qwen2_moe, stablelm, starcoder2 are all supported by the solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This relies, however, on the model exposing `position_ids`. As of the time of writing, 14 models expose them and are supported by the solution. Specifically, Llama 2 and 3, Mistral, Mixtral, Granite, DBRX, Falcon, Gemma, OLMo, Phi 1, 2, and 3, phi3, Qwen 2 and 2 MoE, StableLM, and StarCoder 2 are all supported by the solution.
```

Author: done

> Getting Started

Reviewer 2: Should this be a heading?

Author: correct

> Reaping the benefits of packing with position_ids is easy. To use packing with position_ids, only two steps are required:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reaping the benefits of packing with `position_ids` is easy. To use packing with `position_ids`, only two steps are required:
```

Author: done

> 1) Instantiate the model with flash attention 2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1) Instantiate the model with Flash Attention 2
```

Author: done

> 2) Use the new DataCollatorWithFlattening

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2) Use the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`
```

Author: done

## Here’s how to do that:

![image1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/43790e8c-c2ca-4bc3-98ce-f06169624b2d)
![image2](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a77f17d-9289-4850-b293-543aa67f7d2e)

## Conclusions

> Packing instruction tuning examples with correct within-example-attention, whilst still availing of Flash Attention 2, is now available in Hugging Face, thanks to a recent PR Enhancing SFT Training Efficiency Using Packing and FlashAttention2 with Position ID and the new DataCollatorWithFlattening. Benefits can be seen in throughput during training and peak memory usage. There is no degradation in training convergence, making it a win-win. Actual throughput and memory improvement depend both on the model and the distribution of example lengths in the training data. Training with data that has a wide variation of example lengths will see the greatest benefit, with respect to padding, from using packing with position_ids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Packing instruction tuning examples with correct within-example-attention, while still availing of Flash Attention 2, is now available in Hugging Face, thanks to a recent PR Enhancing SFT Training Efficiency Using Packing and FlashAttention2 with Position ID and the new `DataCollatorWithFlattening`. Benefits can be seen in throughput during training and peak memory usage. There is no degradation in training convergence, making it a win-win. Actual throughput and memory improvement depends on the model and the distribution of example lengths in the training data. Training with data that has a wide variation of example lengths will see the greatest benefit, with respect to padding, from using packing with `position_ids`.
```

Author: done

> For more detailed analysis, have a look at the paper at  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.09105

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a more detailed analysis, have a look at the paper at https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09105
```

Author: done

---
title: "Improving Hugging Face Training Efficiency Through Packing with Flash Attention 2" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/packing-with-FA2/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: RQlee
  guest: true
  org: ibm
- user: ArthurZ
- user: achikundu
  guest: true
- user: lwtr
  guest: true
  org: ibm
- user: rganti
  guest: true

>   org: ibm-ai-platform

Reviewer: Not `ibm`? I can't see this org in their profile.
